# History of Unix

Unix was created at AT&T employees working at Bell Labs. A lot of these 
employees have been involved in design of **MULTICS**, which was short for
Multiplexed Information and Computing Service. Back then, mainframes were so
expensive that users had to operate by time sharing mechanism where they
connected to mainframe by terminals in their time slots, which had a lot less
computing power than mainframes.

MULTICS became so huge and complex that Bell had to pull out of it. But people
in the project, created **UNICS**, simpler and smaller version of MULTICS as a
 side project. It was short for Uniplexed Information and Computing Service.
Very quickly, it became able to support multiple users and got name **UNIX**.

At that time, UNIX became just another mainframe operating system **used
internally** by Bell Labs. Two events led to its popularity. First is, it was
**rewritten in C**. C was already programming language created to write programs
for Unix. Back then, operating systems were written in Assembly which was
specific to hardware. It is very fast but not portable. You had to rewrite most
of operating system according to the target architecture again. Rewriting Unix 
in C made it portable.

The next event is the free distribution of Unix by AT&T thanks to anti-trust
laws. AT&T could not sell the Unix OS so they distributed it freely.
Distribution also included source code. Government agencies, corporations and 
most importantly universities who had mainframe computers could get a free 
license and source code to be able to run on their mainframes.

So Unix became very first things programmers learnt back in the day. First
release in 1975 was called **System Five**. That is the first public version of
Unix. Over time many branches and improvements were published and most famous
of them is **Berkeley Software Distribution** or **BSD** that came out in 1977.

Many other versions of Unix came out as open source, closed source or mixed
source. Linux is open source. Closed source versions are  Sun Oracle's 
**Solaris**, IBM's **AIX** etc. Mixture of open source and closed source
softwares also came out, like Mac OS X.

So, no one is using pure Unix, or System Five. All these operating systems 
used today are Unix-like systems. Mobile devices are Unis-like systems too
since IOS and Android is based on Unix. Mac OS X is combination of BSD,
NextSTEP(Next is a company found by Steve Jobs) and Apple Code, which is called
Darwin. Of course, Mac OS X is not only Darwin, it just sits underneath Mac OS
X. 

Why do we use command line to use Unix directly instead of GUI. First of all,
it is more powerful. It can be thought as automatic transmission vs manual
transmission. You are gaining control and losing convenience by using command
line over graphical user interface. More power to the developer!


